# icgc-argo/mutationalsignatures: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [SigProfiler Matrixgenerator](#matrix-generation) - Generation of the most commonly used SBS, DBS and InDel count matrices based on the provided input data
- [Assessment of Trinucleotide context](#assessment) - Adaption of row orders of the SBS96 mutational count matrices for downstream compatibility with SigProfiler an signature.tools.lib using a [self-written python script](/bin/assessment.py).
- [Assignment using SigProfiler Assignment](#sigprofiler-assignment) - SBS96 assignment against the chosen reference catalogue using SigProfiler Assignment, including metadata of the assignment and TMB estimations per signature
- [Assignment using signature.tools.lib](#signaturetoolslib-assignment) - SBS96 assignment against the chosen reference catalogue using signature.tools.lib.
- [Error Calculation](#error-calculation) - Error estimation based on the differences in the assignments between the signature.tools.lib assignment and the assessed SBS96 catalogue of SigProfiler Assignment for COSMIC.
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

### Matrix Generation

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `matrixgenerator/{cohort}/`
  - `Trinucleotide_matrix_{cohort}_SBS96.txt`: Mutational assignments of the input SNVs to the [trinucleotide context SBS96](https://osf.io/s93d5/wiki/5.%20Output%20-%20SBS/).
  - `Trinucleotide_matrix_{cohort}_DBS78.txt`: Mutational assignments of the input DBSs to the [dinucleotide context DBS78](https://osf.io/s93d5/wiki/5.%20Output%20-%20DBS/).
  - `Trinucleotide_matrix_{cohort}_ID83.txt`: Mutational assignments of the input InDels to the [repeat and microhomology indel context ID83](https://osf.io/s93d5/wiki/5.%20Output%20-%20ID/).

</details>

### Assessment

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `assessment/{cohort}/`
  - `SBS96_reordered_forCOSMIC.txt`: Mutational counts reordered to adhere to the COSMIC reference catalogue row order.
  - `SBS96_reordered_forSIGTOOLS.txt`: Mutational counts reordered to adhere to the SIGNAL reference catalogue row order.

</details>

### SigProfiler Assignment

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `assignment/{cohort}/sigprofiler/output/Assignment_Solution/`
  - `Activities`: Per sample assignment of the SBS96 catalogue to the reference catalogue as tab-separated text file, including plots showing the absolute activities per sample and the estimated TMB contribution per sample to each signature.
  - `Signatures`: Aggregated results of the per trinucleotide attribution to each signature in the reference for the whole cohort as tab-separated text file.
  - `Solution_Stats`: Metadata of the NMF iterations and the respective statistics per iteration.

</details>

### signature.tools.lib Assignment

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `assignment/{cohort}/signaturetoolslib/`
  - `{cohort}.json`: Aggregated results containing the per sample activities per trinucleotide and the per sample assignment to each signature in JSON format.

</details>

### Error Calculation

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `errorthresholding/{cohort}/`
  - `{cohort}_errors.json`: JSON containing the Kullback-Leibler-Divergence, Root-Mean Square Error, Sum of Absolute Differences and the Hellinger distance per cohort.

</details>

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
